Add support for fixed-size tasks (#297)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md

aggregation parameter (e.g, for Poplar1). In addition, the Collector may need to
vary the duration to adjust to changing measurement upload rates.

### Fixed-size Queries

The `fixed-size` query type is used to support applications in which the
Collector needs the ability to strictly control the sample size. This is
particularly important for controlling the amount of noise added to measurements
by Clients (or added to aggregate shares by Aggregators) in order to achieve
differential privacy.

For this query type, the Aggregators batch measurements into arbitrary batches
such that each batch has roughly the same number of reports. The configuration
includes parameters `min_batch_size` and `max_batch_size` that determine,
respectively, the minimum and maximum number of measurements per batch.

To get the aggregate of the next batch, the Collector issues a query of type
`next-batch`. (See FixedSizeQuery in {{query}}.) The response to this query (see
{{collect-flow}}) includes a "batch ID", which can be used to query the same
batch later on. This is done using the `by-batch-id` batch-query type.

Implementation note: The goal for the Aggregators is to aggregate precisely

> `min_batch_size` measurements per batch. Doing so, however, umay be challenging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`min_batch_size` measurements per batch. Doing so, however, may be challenging
```

(typo)

} HpkeCiphertext;
~~~

## Queries {#query}

> DAP is designed to give the Collector control over which measurements are
> included in a batch for aggregation. However, since reports are uploaded to the
> Leader, the Collector cannot choose the batch directly. Instead, it issues a "query" used
> by the Aggregators to guide batch selection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aggregated results are computed based on sets of report, called batches. The Collector
influences which reports are used in a batch via a "query." The Aggregators use this query
to carry out the aggregation flow and produce aggregate shares encrypted to the Collector.
```

This document defines the following query types:

~~~
enum {
   reserved(0), // Reserved for testing purposes
   time-interval(1),
   fixed-size(2),
   (65535)
} QueryType;
~~~

> Additional query types can be defined as needed. A query includes parameters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Future specifications can introduce new query types as needed. A query includes parameters
```

> used by the Aggregators to select a given batch of measurements specific to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
used by the Aggregators to select a batch of reports specific to the
```

given query type:

~~~
enum {
    next-batch(0),
    by-batch-id(1),

> } FixedSizeQueryType;

Reviewer 2: Why not split these out into two separate query types, rather than a single query type with different parameters?

Reviewer 2: I agree that, in the current formulation, the subtypes make sense. However, I don't really see the need for the by-batch-id use case. Why would a collector want to repeatedly query the same batch? Poplar?

Reviewer 2: (Saw the response below -- we can resolve this)

opaque BatchId[32];

struct {
    FixedSizeQueryType fixed_size_query_type;
    select (fixed_size_query_type) {
        next-batch:  Empty;
        by-batch-id: BatchId batch_id;
    }
} FixedSizeQuery;

struct {
    select (query_type) { // determined by query configuration
        case time-interval: Interval batch_interval;
        case fixed-size: FixedSizeQuery fixed_size_query;
    }
} Query;
~~~

The query is issued in-band as part of the collect sub-protocol
({{collect-flow}}). Its content is determined by the "query type", which in turn
is encoded by the "query configuration" configured out-of-band:

~~~
struct {
    QueryType query_type;
    Duration time_precision;
    uint64 min_batch_size;
    select (query_type) {
        case time-interval:
            Empty;
        case fixed-size:
            uint64 max_batch_size;
    }

> } QueryConfig;

Reviewer 2: We need to define what all these fields mean. For example, what is the `time_precision` field?

Author: I've added a line to punt to the relevant subsection. Will this suffice?
> The parameters pertaining to each query configuration are described in the relevant the subsection below.

Reviewer 2: That's fine, yeah.

~~~

### Time-interval Queries

The first query type, `time-interval`, is designed to support applications in

> which some process is observed over a long period of time. The Collector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which measurements are collected over a long period of time. The Collector
```

> specifies a "batch interval" that determines the time range for measurements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
specifies a "batch interval" that determines the time range for reports
```

Reviewer 2: s/measurement/report generally everywhere we are actually operating on reports.

included in the batch: For each measurement in the batch, the time at which that
measurement was generated (see {{upload-flow}}) must fall within the batch
interval specified by the Collector.

The configuration of this query type specifies two paramters:

> - `min_batch_size` - Is the smallest number of measurements the batch is allowed

Reviewer 2: Why is this a query-specific parameter and not something that applies to _all_ types of queries?

Author: It does, I just didn't spell it that way. I'll take another crack.

Author: I've lifted the parameters that apply to all query types to supersection.

  to include. In a sense, this parameter controls the degree of privacy that
  will be obtained: The larger the minimum batch size, the higher degree of
  privacy. However, this ultimately depends on the application and the nature of
  the measurements and aggregation function.

> - `time_precision` - The duration of the smallest permitted batch interval.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `min_batch_interval` - The duration of the smallest permitted batch interval.
```

Reviewer 2: Since `time_precision` is confusing to me.

  use this value to truncate their report timestamps; see {{upload-flow}}.

Typically the Collector issues queries for which the batch intervals are
continuous, monotonically increasing, and have the same duration. For example,
the sequence of batch intervals. For example, the sequence of batch intervals
`(1659544000, 1000)`, `(1659545000, 1000)`, `(1659545000, 1000)`, `(1659546000,
1000)` satisfies these conditions. (The first element of the pair denotes the
start of the batch interval and the second denotes the duration.) Of course,
there are cases in which Collector may need to issue queries out-of-order. For
example, a previous batch might need to be queried again with a different
aggregation parameter (e.g, for Poplar1). In addition, the Collector may need to
vary the duration to adjust to changing measurement upload rates.

### Fixed-size Queries

The `fixed-size` query type is used to support applications in which the
Collector needs the ability to strictly control the sample size. This is
particularly important for controlling the amount of noise added to measurements
by Clients (or added to aggregate shares by Aggregators) in order to achieve
differential privacy.

> For this query type, the Aggregators batch measurements into arbitrary batches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this query type, the Aggregators group reports into arbitrary batches
```

such that each batch has roughly the same number of reports. The configuration
includes parameters `min_batch_size` and `max_batch_size` that determine,
respectively, the minimum and maximum number of measurements per batch.

> To get the aggregate of the next batch, the Collector issues a query of type

Reviewer 3: Do we want to describe the behaviour when collector calls with `next-batch` before the last `batch-id` has been returned? I'm not sure there is a use case for collecting fixed sized batches in parallel. One of the reasons to have fixed size collection is to close a batch asap so any iterative tasks can move on to the next iteration, if there are two opening `batch-id`s for one task, then I imagine the aggregators would distribute reports to these two batches and make the collection slower for one batch? @cjpatton

Author: > One of the reasons to have fixed size collection is to close a batch asap so any iterative tasks can move on to the next iteration, ...

Is there anything in the spec that precludes this? 

> if there are two opening `batch-id`s for one task, then I imagine the aggregators would distribute reports to these two batches and make the collection slower for one batch?

It seems like this is a matter for the implementation. I agree this behavior is permitted, but the Leader could also fill the first batch first, then the second.

`next-batch`. (See FixedSizeQuery in {{query}}.) The response to this query (see
{{collect-flow}}) includes a "batch ID", which can be used to query the same

> batch later on. This is done using the `by-batch-id` batch-query type.

Reviewer 2: What's the use case for querying by-batch-id again in the future? Poplar?

Author: Yup!

Reviewer 2: OK, well, if we didn't have Poplar, would we still need this? I'm growing less and less convinced that Poplar will be actually usable, so I'm not sure we want to add complexity for the sake of something that will not get used.

Implementation note: The goal for the Aggregators is to aggregate precisely
`min_batch_size` measurements per batch. Doing so, however, may be challenging
for Leader deployments in which multiple, independent nodes running the
aggregate sub-protocol (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be coordinated. The
maximum batch size is intended to allow room for error. Typically the difference
between the minimum and maximum batch size will be a small fraction of the
target batch size for each batch.

> [OPEN ISSUE: It may be feasilble to require a fixed batch size, i.e.,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[OPEN ISSUE: It may be feasible to require a fixed batch size, i.e.,
```

    }
}
QueryConfig;
~~~

### Time-series Telemetry

The first query type, `time-series`, is designed to support applications in
which some process is observed over a long period of time. The Collector
specifes a "batch interval" that determines the time range for measurements
included in the batch: For each measurement in the batch, the time at which that
measurement was generated (see {{upload-flow}}) must fall within the batch
interval specified by the Collector.

The configuration of this query type specifies two paramters:

- `min_batch_size` - Is the smallest number of measurements the batch is allowed
  to include. In a sense, this parameter controls the degree of privacy that
  will be obtained: The larger the minimum batch size, the higher degree of
  privacy. However, this ultimately depends on the application and the nature of
  the measurements and aggregation function.

- `min_batch_duration` - The duration of the smallest permitted batch interval.
  Additional restrictions apply; see {{batch-validation}}.

The Collector is free to choose any sqeuence batch intervals it wishes, subject
to the restrctions prescribed in {{batch-validation}}. However, it is

> RECOMMENDED that the sequence of batch intervals requested by the Collector all

Reviewer: One thing useful to call out (but probably not add to the spec text) is that collectors may want to send a collect request before reports for the "query" have finished arriving. For example, in a time-series task, the collector may want to send a collect request for a batch interval that has not yet expired, with the expectation that the created collect job will not be resolved until the interval has completed.

Chris, you pointed out that this is nice in the sense that it means the collector & the aggregators don't need to agree on the clock. Makes sense to me.

I think this is even more important for fixed-chunk tasks: the next chunk being "ready for collection" is based on the rate of report arrival, which the collector can't see. So I think we _need_ to support the "aggressive collector" use-case to support fixed-chunk tasks.

All that said, I'm agnostic on whether this kind of detail should make it into the spec text. :) I think mentioning that the the collector can choose whatever intervals it wishes; I'm less sure of the value of `RECOMMEND`ing a particular sequence of intervals.

> RECOMMENDED that the sequence of batch intervals requested by the Collector all

Author: TODO: Ready for text

> RECOMMENDED that the sequence of batch intervals requested by the Collector all

Author: Dropped the RECOMMENDATION. I'm not sure how to spell the Aggregator behavior, so I left as an open issue. WE can deal with this later.

the sequence of batch intervals `(1659544000, 1000)`, `(1659545000, 1000)`,
`(1659545000, 1000)`, `(1659546000, 1000)` satisfies these conditions. (The
first element of the pair denotes the start of the batch interval and the second
denotes the duration.) There are execptions to this standard operating
procedure:

- The Collecotry may need to extend a batch interval forward in time if the
  interval has elabsed and an insufficient number of measurements have been
  uploaded. For example, instead of `(1659546000, 1000)`, the Collector might an
  issue a query for `(1659546000, 2000)`.

- Batch intervals may appear out-of-order if, for example, the Collector needs
  to query a previous batch with a new aggregation parameter. This is permitted
  for certain VDAFs.

### Fixed-size Chunks

The `fixed-chunk` query type is used to support applications in which the
Collector needs the ability to strictly control the sample size. This is
particularly important for controlling the amount of noise added to measurements
by Clients (or added to aggregate shares by Aggregators) in order to achieve
differential privacy.

> For this query type, the Aggregators batch measuremnet into arbitrary "chunks"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For this query type, the Aggregators batch measurements into arbitrary "chunks"
```

such that each chunk has roughly the same size. The configuration includes
parameters `min_batch_size` and `max_batch_size` that determine, respectively,
the minumum and maximum number of measurements per chunk.

To get the aggregate of the next chunk, the Colector issues a "chunk query" of
type `next-chunk`. (See ChunkQuery in {{query}}.) The response to this query

> ((see {{collect-flow}})) includes a "chunk ID", which can be used to query the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
(see {{collect-flow}}) includes a "chunk ID", which can be used to query the
```

> same chunk later on. This is done using the `by-chunk-id` chunk query type.

Author: TODO: Deal with the case where a client queries an unknown chunk.

Implementation note: The goal for the Aggregators is to aggregate precisely
`min_batch_size` measurements per chunk. Doing so, however, is challenging for
Leader deployments in which multiple, independent nodes running the aggregate

> sub-protocol (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be coordinated. The maximum batch

Reviewer: I think creating an aggregation job and attaching it to a given chunk requires knowing [an overestimate of] the sum of the number of reports successfully aggregated + the number of "outstanding" reports in in-progress aggregation jobs. Otherwise, creating an aggregation job may cause the chunk to grow past `max_batch_size`, effectively losing the chunk.

If you can update this sum "transactionally" with creation of the aggregation job, you can always hit `min_batch_size` exactly.

If you can't, I think avoiding chunk overflow requires having enough "leeway" (in `max_batch_size - min_batch_size`) such that every worker creating a max-size job at once will not move a chunk that has not yet aggregated `min_batch_size` reports to have aggregated more than `max_batch_size` reports, since every worker might simultaneously see the same information and independently decide to schedule an aggregation job. Another way of putting it is: I think increasing the "precision" of the size of your chunks would require reducing parallelism in the number of workers simultaneously aggregating into the chunk; equivalently, increasing worker parallelism to aggregate a task more quickly will lead to decreased "precision" in the size of the chunks that are generated.

Is that sort of what you're thinking (especially in the analysis in the previous paragraph)? I'm also curious if hitting `min_batch_size` exactly provides advantages over just knowing the number of reports in the chunk -- it would be relatively easy to communicate the report count to the collector, and if doing so would let us stop worrying about `max_batch_size` that might be the easier path.

> sub-protocol (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be coordinated. The maximum batch

Reviewer 4: My bias is for simplicity in the protocol text, which I think argues for requiring fixed size chunks, and my intuition is that this should be achievable. My intuition (I'm using "intuition" as a weasel word here so that I don't actually have to support my arguments) is that the coordination you describe should be achievable in a datastore with [serializability](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serializability), which I think DAP implementations require anyway in order to do things like anti-replay.

However I think I want to get more implementation experience with the fixed chunk mode before I argue this point further, so let's go ahead with what's here now.

Finally, we already have #163 to wire up the report count to the collector, orthogonally to what's going on in this PR.

> sub-protocol (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be coordinated. The maximum batch

Author: @BranLwyd as discussed at IETF, the main reason to target a given batch size is that in some statistical applications you need to be able to control for the sample size. This would be important, for example, when using local differential privacy.

I'd like to start resolving threads where possible. The question left open here is whether requiring `min_batch_size == max_batch_size` is feasible. @tgeoghegan are you alright with resolving this with an OPEN ISSUE in the text?

> sub-protocol (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be coordinated. The maximum batch

Reviewer 4: Yes, I'm comfortable revisiting this after we get some experience implementing the fixed chunk mode. However I would urge you to highlight this particular question in the thread you started on the ppm-ietf list just in case someone there has an opinion.

> sub-protocol (see {{aggregate-flow}}) need to be coordinated. The maximum batch

Author: Done.

Leader, the Collector cannot choose the batch directly. Instead, it issues a "query" used
by the Aggregators to guide batch selection.

This document defines the following query types:

~~~
enum {
   reserved(0), // Reserved for testing purposes
   time-series(1),
   fixed-chunk(2),
   (65535)
} QueryType;
~~~

Additional query types can be defined as needed. A query includes parameters
used by the Aggregators to select a given batch of measurements specific to the
given query type:

~~~
enum {
    next-chunk(0),
    by-chunk-id(1),
} ChunkQueryType;

opaque ChunkId[32];

struct {
    ChunkQueryType chunk_query_type;
    select (chunk_query_type) {
        next-chunk:  Empty;
        by-chunk-id: ChunkId chunk_id;
    }
} ChunkQuery;

struct {
    select (query_type) { // determined by query configuration
        case time-series: Interval batch_interval;
        case fixed-chunk: ChunkQuery chunk_query;
    }
} Query;
~~~

The query is issued in-band as part of the collect sub-protocol
({{collect-flow}}). Its content is determined by the "query type", which in turn
is encoded by the "query configuration" configured out-of-band:

> ~~~

Author: Ack.

> ~~~

Reviewer 4: +1 to not defining this as a struct, for the reasons Bran lays out but also to be consistent with how we discuss task parameters.

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: I agree with Brandon here. Can we describe a configuration the same way we do a task configuration?

> ~~~

Author: Done.

struct {
    QueryType query_type;
    uint64 min_batch_size;
    select (query_type) {
        case time-series:
            Duration min_batch_duration;
        case fixed-chunk:
            uint64 max_batch_size;
    }
} QueryConfig;
~~~

### Time-series Telemetry

The first query type, `time-series`, is designed to support applications in
which some process is observed over a long period of time. The Collector

> specifes a "batch interval" that determines the time range for measurements

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
specifies a "batch interval" that determines the time range for measurements
```

} HpkeCiphertext;
~~~

## Queries {#query}

Aggregated results are computed based on sets of report, called batches. The
Collector influences which reports are used in a batch via a "query." The
Aggregators use this query to carry out the aggregation flow and produce
aggregate shares encrypted to the Collector.

This document defines the following query types:

~~~
enum {
   reserved(0), // Reserved for testing purposes
   time-interval(1),
   fixed-size(2),
   (65535)
} QueryType;
~~~

The time-interval query type is described in {{time-interval-query}}; the
fixed-size query type is described in {{fixed-size-query}}. Future
specifications can introduce new query types as needed. A query includes
parameters used by the Aggregators to select a batch of reports specific to the
given query type. A query is defined as follows:

~~~
enum {
    next-batch(0),
    by-batch-id(1),
} FixedSizeQueryType;

opaque BatchId[32];

struct {
    FixedSizeQueryType fixed_size_query_type;
    select (fixed_size_query_type) {

>         next-batch:  Empty;

Reviewer 5: What is the idempotency story for `next-batch` requests? I think achieving idempotency requires the interaction to look something like this:

1. Collector issues `next-batch` collect request to Leader, receives collect job URI. Collector notes that the collect job URI needs to be collected to its own durable storage.
2. Collector polls collect job URI until the Leader gives a completed collect response, records the aggregation value & that the collect job is complete to its own durable storage.

If that's accurate, I think that we should spell out that `next-batch` returns the same collect job until the Collector actually collects the job--I think this isn't spell out currently, and if we don't have those semantics, repeated `next-batch` requests might cause batches to be dropped if recording the collect job URI to the Collector's durable storage fails.

Also, if it's acceptable to allow batch IDs to be enumerable (e.g. a counter, as suggested by others), I think a simpler idempotent design would be to have the Collector track which batch ID is next itself, and change `next-batch` to something like `max-batch` to allow Collectors to "start up" without knowing what the next batch is. This approach would simplify the Collector's state updates.

Author: > What is the idempotency story for `next-batch` requests? I think achieving idempotency requires the interaction to look something like this:
> 
>     1. Collector issues `next-batch` collect request to Leader, receives collect job URI. Collector notes that the collect job URI needs to be collected to its own durable storage.
> 
>     2. Collector polls collect job URI until the Leader gives a completed collect response, records the aggregation value & that the collect job is complete to its own durable storage.

This is accurate.

> If that's accurate, I think that we should spell out that `next-batch` returns the same collect job until the Collector actually collects the job--I think this isn't spelled out currently, and if we don't have those semantics, repeated `next-batch` requests might cause batches to be dropped if recording the collect job URI to the Collector's durable storage fails.

Each `next-batch` query would correspond to a different batch, and thus a different collect job. If the Collector queues up a bunch of collect jobs, then each job would still correspond to a different batch, right?

> Also, if it's acceptable to allow batch IDs to be enumerable (e.g. a counter, as suggested by others), I think a simpler idempotent design would be to have the Collector track which batch ID is next itself, and change `next-batch` to something like `max-batch` to allow Collectors to "start up" without knowing what the next batch is. This approach would simplify the Collector's state updates.

Reviewer 5: (sorry, this comment is a little late to the party)

> Each next-batch query would correspond to a different

I see -- in that case, I think there is potential for data-loss if the Collector crashes at an inopportune time. Consider the following:

1. The Leader has a collect job ready to be retrieved, call it `X`.
2. The Collector issues a `next-batch` request, receives a collect job corresponding to `X`.
3. Before storing the collect job ID to durable storage or polling for completion, the Collector (or some relevant subcomponent) crashes & loses its state.

In this case, I think the Collector has lost batch `X` permanently: it no longer knows the relevant collect job ID, and there is no way to interact with the Leader to retrieve it since further `next-batch` requests will result in different collect jobs being returned.

I think the best way to fix this might be based on the idea of making the batch IDs enumerable as suggested by #301. I'll add a comment to that bug.

structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Time time;
    Nonce nonce;
    Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
} ReportInfo;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;

>   ReportInfo info;

Author: Done.

  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} Report;
~~~

This message is called the Client's report. It consists of a "header" and the
encrypted input share of each of the Aggregators. The header consists of:

* The task ID for which the report is intended.

* A timestamp representing the time at which the report was generated.
  Specifically, the `time` field is set to the number of seconds elapsed since
  the start of the UNIX epoch.

>     * For time-interval tasks, the client SHOULD round this value to the nearest

Author: Done.

structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Time time;
    Nonce nonce;
    Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
} ReportMetadata;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  ReportMetadata metadata;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} Report;
~~~

> This message is called the Client's report. It consists of a "header" and the

Reviewer 2: If we're going to refer to the header, why not actually introduce a header struct?

```
struct {
    TaskID task_id;
    Time time;
    Nonce nonce;
    Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
} ReportHeader;
```

Reviewer 2: Also, this change seems unrelated to the query type change. Is it possible to apply it in a separate PR?

Reviewer 2: That's a fine way to spell the header, but isn't the task ID also included in each report? In any case, we refer to this thing called a "header" but then don't actually define what it is. Let's either drop the word "header", or clarify that header == task ID + metadata. 

(And in the future, we need to stop landing unrelated changes in PRs like this!)

Author: The task ID is included in each `Report`, but is not sent in each `ReportShare` sent during the agg flow. OTOH the metadata is unique to each `ReportShare`, which is why I've split metadata and task ID.

Agreed on minimizing PRs. Like I said, it's an artifact of a previous version of this PR. Still, I think it's a useful change. I'm happy to pull it out into a separate PR.

encrypted input share of each of the Aggregators. The header consists of:

* The task ID for which the report is intended.

* A timestamp representing the time at which the report was generated.
  Specifically, the `time` field is set to the number of seconds elapsed since

>   the start of the UNIX epoch. The client SHOULD round this value to the nearest

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  the start of the UNIX epoch. The client SHOULD round this value down to the nearest
```
The existing text had "rounded down", so let's be consistent with that.

structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Time time;
    Nonce nonce;
    Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
} ReportInfo;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  ReportInfo info;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} Report;
~~~

This message is called the Client's report. It consists of a "header" and the
encrypted input share of each of the Aggregators. The header consists of:

* The task ID for which the report is intended.

* A timestamp representing the time at which the report was generated.
  Specifically, the `time` field is set to the number of seconds elapsed since
  the start of the UNIX epoch.

>     * For time-series tasks, the client MUST round this value to the nearest

Reviewer 4: This wasn't a MUST previously, and we discussed why at the time in [#281](https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/281#pullrequestreview-1025110801).

Author: Oh good, I thought the intention was MUST. How about SHOULD?

>     * For time-series tasks, the client MUST round this value to the nearest

Author: Right, I don't know what to do about this awkwardness. One way to resolve this is to find a reason not to include the timestamp for fixed-size tasks. (The argument would be that preventing overlapping batch intervals for this task type has marginal benefit or is not feasible.) There is an OPEN ISSUE in the text in case we want to punt.

>     * For time-series tasks, the client MUST round this value to the nearest

Reviewer: Thinking about this a little more, I suppose the task doesn't need a new explicit parameter -- clients can freely round their submitted timestamps to any desired resolution already.

I suppose this will be left as an OPEN ISSUE right now, but one way to resolve would be to say that clients can round their timestamps, and additionally mandate that clients of a time-series task must round to at most the `min_batch_duration` to keep their reports in the correct buckets.

>     * For time-series tasks, the client MUST round this value to the nearest

Author: @wangshan made the same suggestion. What I decided to do was replace `min_batch_duration` with `time_precision`, which is used by the Clients to truncate their report and, in the case time-series tasks, to define the min batch duration.

  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} Report;
~~~

This message is called the Client's report. It consists of a "header" and the
encrypted input share of each of the Aggregators. The header consists of:

* The task ID for which the report is intended.

* Information used to determine whether to include a report in a given
  batch.

    * For time-series tasks, this inclues a timestamp representing the time
      at which the report was generated. Specifically, the `time` field is set
      to the number of seconds elapsed since the start of the UNIX epoch. The
      client MUST round this value to the nearest multiple of
      `min_batch_duration` in order to ensure that that the timestamp cannot be
      used to link a report back to the Client that generated it.

* A nonce used by the Aggregators to ensure the report appears in at most one
  batch. (See {{anti-replay}}.) The Client MUST generate this by generating 16
  random bytes using a cryptographically secure random number gnerator.

* A list of extensions to be included with the report. (See
  {{upload-extensions}}.)

To generate a report, the Client first shards its measurement into input shares

> as specifieed by the VDAF. It then encrypts each input share as follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
as specified by the VDAF. It then encrypts each input share as follows:
```

      client MUST round this value to the nearest multiple of
      `min_batch_duration` in order to ensure that that the timestamp cannot be
      used to link a report back to the Client that generated it.

* A nonce used by the Aggregators to ensure the report appears in at most one
  batch. (See {{anti-replay}}.) The Client MUST generate this by generating 16
  random bytes using a cryptographically secure random number gnerator.

* A list of extensions to be included with the report. (See
  {{upload-extensions}}.)

To generate a report, the Client first shards its measurement into input shares
as specified by the VDAF. It then encrypts each input share as follows:

~~~
enc, payload = SealBase(pk,
    "dap-01 input share" || 0x01 || server_role,
    header, input_share)
~~~

where `pk` is the aggregator's public key; `server_role` is the Role of the
intended recipient (`0x02` for the leader and `0x03` for the helper), `header`
is the report header, and `input_share` is the Aggregator's input share.

The order of the encrypted input shares appear MUST match the order of the
task's `aggregator_endpoints`. That is, the first share should be the leader's,

> the second share should be for the first helper, and so on.

Reviewer: I think L800 (a few lines down from here) needs to change. It currently reads:

> The leader MUST ignore any report whose nonce contains a timestamp that falls in
a batch interval for which it has received at least one collect request from the
collector.

Nonces no longer have a timestamp. Depending on the task configuration, reports might no longer have a timestamp at all.

More importantly, this would block an "aggressive collector" which wants to send collect requests before reports have finished arriving for a given batch, with the expectation that the collect job will stay live until the batch is "over". Supporting the aggressive collector is a nice-to-have for time-series tasks (since it breaks the need for a collector to have a clock that matches the aggregators', and removes a case where a collector can trigger data loss accidentally), and I think a requirement for fixed-chunk tasks (since batches are determined by the rate of report arrival, and the collector does not have any insight into this, so it can't know when to make another collect request).

Author: Good catch. I think the following solves both issues. This also matches the Helper's behavior in {{input-share-batch-validation}}.

> The Leader MUST ignore any report pertaining to a batch that has already been collected.

For time-interval tasks the intended interpretation is "the Leader rejects the report if the timestamp falls in a batch interval that has been collected". For fixed-size tasks the intended interpretation is "The Leader MUST NOT include the report in a previously collected batch."

structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
    Time time;
    Nonce nonce;
    Extension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
} ReportMetadata;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  ReportMetadata metadata;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} Report;
~~~

This message is called the Client's report. It consists of a "header" and the

> encrypted input share of each of the Aggregators. The header consists of:

Reviewer 2: Here let's say that header consists of (1) task ID and (2) metadata, and then list what the metadata consists of. That way the text is consistent with the struct.

Author: Good idea. Done!

~~~
struct {
  ReportInfo info;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_share;
} ReportShare;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  AggregationJobID job_id;
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>;
  select (query_type) { // determined by task configuration
    time-interval: Empty;
    fixed-size: BatchId batch_id;
  }
  ReportShare report_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregateInitializeReq;
~~~

[[OPEN ISSUE: Consider sending report shares separately (in parallel) to the
aggregate instructions. Right now, aggregation parameters and the corresponding
report shares are sent at the same time, but this may not be strictly
necessary.]]

This message consists of:

* The ID of the task for which the reports will be aggregated.

* The aggregation job ID.

* The opaque, VDAF-specific aggregation parameter provided during the
  collection flow (`agg_param`),

  [[OPEN ISSUE: Check that this handling of `agg_param` is appropriate when the
  definition of Poplar is done.]]

* Information used by the Aggregators to determine how to aggregate each report:

>     * For fixed-size tasks, the Leader specifies a "batch ID" that determines

Reviewer 3: Is it worth mentioning that the binding of batch_id and agg_job_ids is permanent? so collect query can be idempotent: query of the same batch_id should return the same result, if max_batch_lifetime > 0.

Author: Maybe, but not here. This would go in the collect sub-protocol I'd think.

~~~
struct {
  ReportInfo info;
  HpkeCiphertext encrypted_input_share;
} ReportShare;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  AggregationJobID job_id;
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>;
  select (query_type) { // determined by task configuration
    time-series: Empty;
    fixed-chunk: BatchId batch_id;
  }
  ReportShare report_shares<1..2^32-1>;
} AggregateInitializeReq;
~~~

[[OPEN ISSUE: Consider sending report shares separately (in parallel) to the
aggregate instructions. Right now, aggregation parameters and the corresponding
report shares are sent at the same time, but this may not be strictly
necessary.]]

This message consists of:

* The ID of the task for which the reports will be aggregated.

* The aggregation job ID.

> * The opaque, VDAF-specifict aggregation parameter provided during the

Reviewer 6: VDAF-specifict -> VDAF-specific

#### Input Share Decryption {#input-share-decryption}

> Each report share has a corresponding task ID, report info (nonce, batch

Reviewer 6: report info should be nonce, time, and extensions?

Author: Haha yup good catch!

1. Check if the report has never been aggregated but is contained by
   a batch that has been collected. If this check fails, the input share
   MUST be marked as invalid with the error `batch-collected`. This prevents
   additional reports from being aggregated after its batch has already
   been collected.
2. Check if the report has already been aggregated with this aggregation
   parameter. If this check fails, the input share MUST be marked as invalid
   with the error `report-replayed`. This is the case if the report was used in
   a previous aggregate request and is therefore a replay. An aggregator may

>    also choose to mark an input share as invalid with the  error

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   also choose to mark an input share as invalid with the error
```

   `report-dropped` under the conditions prescribed in {{anti-replay}}.
3. Depending on the query type for the task, additional checks may be applicable:
    * For fixed-chunk tasks, the Aggregators need to ensure that each batch is
      roughly the same size. If the number of reports aggregated for the current
      chunk exceeds the maximum batch size (per the task configuration), the
      Aggregator MAY mark the input share as invalid with the error

>       "batch-saturated". Note that this behasvior is not strictly enforced here

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      "batch-saturated". Note that this behavior is not strictly enforced here
```

## Collecting Results {#collect-flow}

In this phase, the Collector requests aggregate shares from each aggregator and

> then locally combines them to yield a single, aggregate result. In particular,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
then locally combines them to yield a single aggregate result. In particular,
```

~~~
struct {
  TaskID task_id;

>   Query query;

Author: > In the fixed chunk model, however, we grant the leader total power to assign reports to chunks (modulo the max and min sizes the task defines), so we should carefully analyze what powers that gives the leader.

Nice catch. There should already be an OPEN ISSUE somewhere in this PR about this.

> For instance, suppose the leader can see the uploading client's IP and do geolocation. Maybe it constructs one chunk that only contains reports from clients in country A and another chunk that only contains reports from country B in an effort to skew either chunk's aggregation somehow?

Agreed, this is a risk worth considering. I imagine there are other things the Leader can do like this already, but you're right that the intention of including the timestamp in the report was to allow the Client to control (at least in part), which batch its report goes in.

It's worth pointing out that replay protection requirements haven't changed: Each Aggregator still needs to ensure that a single report doesn't get replayed in multiple chunks.

> My intuition on how this feature is used is that you want to enable the leader to create a chunk every `min_chunk_size` reports. So maybe we want to enable the client to verify that the chunks defined by the leader are made up of non-overlapping intervals? That would require putting the `Time` component back in a report `Nonce`, but this would use code the helper needs to have anyway to enforce that batch interval queries don't overlap.

Ohhhh that's an interesting idea! Your intuition is right I think. It's a little stricter than what this PR does now. (And thus harder to implement?). The Leader can still mount a similar "attack" by only processing reports from the Client population it's interested in. However there is a cost: It'll end up losing the data for all other Clients.

Feedback on feasibility of the implementation would be useful.

>   Query query;

Reviewer 7: I think this concern is valid, but making sure each chunk has non-overlapping intervals can cause us to lose some late-arriving reports. For example, assuming max_batch_lifetime is 1 for simplicity, and I have a task that can quickly fulfill min chunk size in a short period of time (e.g. 1 minute). If leader has constructed a chunk that meets minimum chunk size, the min and max time of all the reports in this chunk defines the interval for this chunk. Now for the next chunk, leader is only allowed to collect reports that have timestamps later than the max timestamp of the previous chunk. If there are late arriving reports, leader is forced to drop all of them even though they are valid, so the availability of the leader service may take a hit in this case.

>   Query query;

Reviewer 4: re: Brandon's points:

(1): This was already a case we had to handle in the batch interval query, and I think we would handle it the same way here: if a report arrives after the collect job for its chunk has been serviced, it gets ignored.

(2): Ooh, this is interesting. I think this can be handled, though. Let's say a collector comes along and asks for the result of aggregating chunk ID 4, and then immediately asks for chunk ID 5. The leader will generate a couple of collect job URIs and send those back to the collector -- at this point there's no aggregator commitment to which reports go in which chunk. The leader might then identify a set of candidate reports for chunk 4 and another set for chunk 5. It then carves each set of reports into some number of aggregation jobs and executes them with the helper.

Now, suppose enough reports are rejected from the candidate set assigned to chunk 4 that `min_batch_size` isn't satisfied. The leader will want to then steal some aggregation jobs from chunk 5 to get chunk 4 over the minimum.

OK, but what if the aggregation jobs for chunk 5 finished first and the aggregate result was delivered to the collector? In that case, yes, we are stuck and can never satisfy the collect request for chunk 4. But we could assert that the leader can't deliver the results for the collect job for chunk 5 until it has delivered the results for chunk 4. Note that the constraint here is not on when or in what order the aggregators can do the work of preparation. The constraint is on when the results can be delivered, because it's only at that point that the aggregators commit to assigning a set of reports to a chunk.

So I think this means that aggregators could still be running all the aggregate jobs in parallel. They just have to require that before you can deliver the results for collect job _n_, the collect jobs for the previous _n-1_ chunks must have been completed.

The problem with this is that we want to allow collectors to skip ahead in the stream of chunks. I suppose this could be accomplished by having the collector send DELETE requests to collect job URIs for those chunks it wants to skip?

>   Query query;

Reviewer 6: @tgeoghegan Regarding bullet point 1, what if each report rounds down its timestamp to the nearest n-hour window (a coarse-grained timestamp to protect client privacy, let's say 4 hours for example)? Leader can create a chunk with just enough reports that have timestamp 00:00, doesn't that mean leader will be forced to drop all future reports that mark its timestamp at 00:00?

>   Query query;

Author: Thanks, everyone, for taking time to help with this. I think we're now at a point where we need to take a step back and think through requirements.

First, in response to feedback from @tgeoghegan and @BranLwyd, not that we have renamed "time-series" to "time-interval" and "fixed-chunk" to "fized-size". Instead of "chunk" we'll just say "batch".

A quick summary to see if we're on the same page. @tgeoghegan points out a desirable property of time-interval tasks: Given the sequence of queries, a Clients know exactly *which* batch their report would be included in, since we have the following properties:
- (1.) a report can belong to exactly one batch
- (2.) batches are non-overlapping
- (3.) a query determines a unique batch 

For "fixed-size" tasks, we currently guarantee something strictly weaker: a Client is know their report is included in at most one batch, but it does not know which one. This is because we have (1.) and (2.) but not (3.).

We don't seem to have a workable solution to this yet:
- (a.) We could have the Client include the batch ID in its report. This is the direct analogue of including the timestamp in the report. However this is a non-starter because it shifts coordination of the batch selection to Clients.
- (b.) We could require that batches don't overlap in time, just as we do for time-interval tasks. @BranLwyd and @junyechen1996 have pointed out various reasons why this is tricky.

These difficulties beg the following essential question: **How important is property (3.)?** Without it, the Leader is capable of sorting reports into batches as it pleases. For example:
* The Leader can batch reports by User-Agent, location, and so on. This is is still possible with (3.), but this would at least force the Leader to "throw away" reports from clients that are not in the target group, but pertain to the query.
* The Leader can do a kind of weak stuffing attack. Stuffing attacks ares still possible with (3.), but again, it would at least force the Leader to throw away any reports that pertain to the query.

>   Query query;

Author: My take: This threat falls into a big bucket of Sybil-like attacks that I would like to see a more systematic solution for. (Yes Sybil attacks are hard, but they're at least tractable.) Thus I don't think it's worth expending too much effort trying to get (3.). My vote would be to not require it for every query type (and fixed-size queries in particular), but make sure whatever we spell doesn't prevent it.

>   Query query;

Reviewer 3: I don't think property (3) is critical for this feature, since leader can do similar things no matter what collection type is used, with pretty trivial effort. If the leader/collector also authors clients, then it can design a task that apply a malicious filter from clients, I don't think this is the type of threat DAP can address on its own.

>   Query query;

Reviewer 2: Let's use the open issue to track resolution to this. I'm not convinced that we want to abandon (3) just yet.

>   Query query;

Author: I think that approach would drop (3.) for time-interval tasks, which at this point I prefer not to do :) Perhaps there is a version of this that'll work.

to the collector's collect response. To do this, the leader first computes a
checksum over the set of output shares included in the batch. The checksum is
computed by taking the SHA256 hash of each nonce from the client reports
included in the aggregation, then combining the hash values with a bitwise-XOR
operation.

Then, for each aggregator endpoint `[aggregator]` in the parameters associated
with `CollectReq.task_id` (see {{collect-flow}}) except its own, the leader sends
a POST request to `[aggregator]/aggregate_share` with the following message:

~~~
struct {
  select (query_type) { // determined by task configuration
    time-series: Interval batch_interval;
    fixed-chunk: Id chunk_id;
  }
} BatchSelector;

struct {
  TaskID task_id;
  BatchSelector batch_selector;
  opaque agg_param<0..2^16-1>;
  uint64 report_count;
  opaque checksum[32];
} AggregateShareReq;
~~~

The message contains the following parameters:

* The task ID.

* The "batch seletor", which encodes parameters used to determine the batch
  being aggregated. The value depends on the query type for the task:

    * For time-series tasks, the request specifies the batch interval.

>     * For fixed-chunk tasks, the requiest specifies the chunk ID.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    * For fixed-chunk tasks, the request specifies the chunk ID.
```

~~~
agg_share = OpenBase(enc_share.enc, sk, "dap-01 aggregate share" ||
    server_role || 0x00, task_id || batch_selector, enc_share.payload)
~~~

where `sk` is the HPKE secret key, `task_id` is the task ID for the collect
request, and `server_role` is the role of the server that sent the aggregate
share (`0x02` for the leader and `0x03` for the helper). The value of
`batch_selector` is computed by the Collector from its query and the response to
its query:

* For time-interval tasks, the batch selector is the batch interval specified in
  the query.

* For fixed-size tasks, the batch selector is the batch ID assigned sent in the
  response.

> ### Batch Validation {#batch-validation}

Reviewer 2: Can we refactor this such that there are subsections for each type of query? I know that there's some shared logic, but the mixed time/fixed-size validation steps is a bit hard to parse, especially if I'm only implementing one of them.

Author: Good idea, I will work on this now.

Author: Done, please have a look.

Reviewer 2: Looks good!

Before an aggregator responds to a collect request or aggregate-share request,
it must first check that the request does not violate the parameters associated
with the DAP task. It does so as described here.

First the aggregator checks that the request respects any batch "boundaries"
determined by the query configuration:

* For time-interval tasks, the query configuration specifies the "minimum batch
  duration", which is determined by `time_precision`. For the `batch_interval`
  included with the query, the Aggregator checks that both
  `batch_interval.start` and `batch_interval.duration` are divisible by
  `time_precision` and that `batch_interval.duration >= time_precision`.

> * For fixed-size tasks, the batch is assocaited with a "batch ID" selected by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For fixed-size tasks, the batch is associated with a "batch ID" selected by
```

  the Leader. Thus the Aggregator needs to check that the query is associated
  with a known batch ID:

    * If the query contained in the CollectReq has type `by-batch-id`, the
      Leader checks that the provided batch ID corresponds to a batch ID it

>       returned in a previous CollectResp for the task.

Reviewer 2: Why would the Collector not be able to opportunistically query by batch ID? What if the IDs were monotonically increasing and the Collector just wanted to iterate over the batches?

Author: We kicked this around a bit. It seems like this could get tricky. For example, there would need to be a mechanism to ensure that that queries are issued in order: Imagine the collector picks batch id = 10,000, then batch id = 1.

On balance, explicit batch IDs picked by the leader seemed simpler.

    * The Helper checks that the batch ID provided by the leader in its
      AggregateShareReq corresponds to a batch ID used in a previous
      AggregateInitializeReq for the task.

If the boundary check fails, then the Aggregator MUST abort with error
"batchInvalid".

Next, the Aggregator checks that batch contains a valid number of reports. Let
`X` denote the set of reports in the batch:

* For time-interval tasks, the query configuration specifies the minimum batch
  size, `min_batch_size`. The Aggregator checks that `len(X) >= min_batch_size`.

* For fixed-size tasks, the query configuration specifies the minimum batch
  size, `min_batch_size`, and maximum batch size. The Aggregator checks that

>   `len(X) >= min_batch_size` and `len(X) < max_batch_size`.

Reviewer 3: nit: `max_batch_size` is the only upper bound that's exclusive, should we make it `<=` ? @cjpatton

Author: Done.

If the batch size check fails, then the Aggregator MUST abort with error
"invalidBatchSize".

Next, the Aggregator checks that the batch has not been aggregated too many
times. This is determined by the maximum batch lifetime, `max_batch_lifetime`.
Unless the query has been issued less than `max_batch_lifetime` times, the
Aggregator MUST abort with error "batchLifetimeExceeded".

Finally, the Aggregator checks that the batch does not contain a report that was
included in any previous batch. If this batch intersection check fails, then the
Aggregator MUST abort with error "batchOverlap".

Depending on the query type, properly checking for batch intersections may be
prohibitively expensive for some deployments. The following is sufficient (but
not necessary):

* For time-interval tasks, the Aggregator checks that the batch interval does not
  overlap with the batch interval of any previous query. If this batch interval
  check fails, then the Aggregator MAY abort with error "batchOverlap".

[[OPEN ISSUE: #195 tracks how we might relax this constraint to allow for more
collect query flexibility. As of now, this is quite rigid and doesn't give the
collector much room for mistakes.]]

> [OPEN ISSUE: We might need to permit the Aggregator to drop a request as needed, if

Reviewer 2: Definitely. Why is this even an open issue?

Author: Yup, this appears to be redundant: see https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/180. Thanks @tgeoghegan!

#### Time-interval Queries {#time-interval-batch-validation}

##### Boundary Check

The batch boundaries are determined by the `time_precision` field of the query
configuration. For the `batch_interval` included with the query, the Aggregator
checks that:

* `batch_interval.duration >= time_precision` (this field determines,
  effectively, the minimum batch duration)

* both `batch_interval.start` and `batch_interval.duration` are divisible by
  `time_precision`

These measures ensure that Aggregators can efficiently "pre-aggregate" output
shares recovered during the aggregation sub-protocol.

##### Size Check

The query configuration specifies the minimum batch size, `min_batch_size`. The
Aggregator checks that `len(X) >= min_batch_size`, where `X` is the set of
reports in the batch.

#### Fixed-size Queries {#fixed-size-batch-validation}

##### Boundary Check

For fixed-size tasks, the batch boundaries are defined by "batch IDs" selected
by the Leader. Thus the Aggregator needs to check that the query is associated
with a known batch ID:

* If the query contained in the CollectReq has type `by-batch-id`, the
  Leader checks that the provided batch ID corresponds to a batch ID it

>   returned in a previous CollectResp for the task.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this requirement is necessary. The Collector should be able to query for batches by ID opportunistically, I think.

Author: I don't see a way to enable this without creating lots of corner cases. I think we need two things in order to pursue this:
1. What's the motivation? Is there a reason why the current scheme is not workable for Collectors? What's the advantage of knowing the batch ID in advance, beyond not having to store it?
2. A way to address corner cases like: What does the Collector do if the Leader requests batch 9999, then batch 1? If the Leader is aggregating opportunistically (like it may do for Prio), it might have to wait to starting filling batch 9999 until 1, ..., 9998 have been filled.

This point has already been discussed at some length on the slack. I'm happy to keep discussing, but could we do so in an issue so we have a chance to level set?

~~~
agg_share = OpenBase(enc_share.enc, sk, "dap-01 aggregate share" ||
    server_role || 0x00, task_id || batch_selector, enc_share.payload)
~~~

where `sk` is the HPKE secret key, `task_id` is the task ID for the collect
request, and `server_role` is the role of the server that sent the aggregate
share (`0x02` for the leader and `0x03` for the helper). The value of
`batch_selector` is computed by the Collector from its query and the response to
its query:

* For time-series tasks, the batch selector is the batch interval specified in
  the query.

* For fixed-chunk tasks, the batch selector is the chunk ID assigned sent in the
  response.

### Batch Validation {#batch-validation}

Before an aggregator responds to a collect request or aggregate-share request,
it must first check that the request does not violate the parameters associated
with the DAP task. It does so as described here.

> Frist the aggregator checks that the request respects any batch "boundaries"

Author: Maybe "boundary" is the wrong word? For time-series tasks, these are  the batch windows. For fixed-chunk tasks, these are the chunks.

> Frist the aggregator checks that the request respects any batch "boundaries"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
First the aggregator checks that the request respects any batch "boundaries"
```
